## Derivation/fitting methods

  I. Differentiation
    - what is the path definitely not, based on various maximized measures of similarity?
    - what variance is unexplained
    - what attributes & attribute sets & attribute dependency trees differ
    - what is transformation cost/potential between objects
    - what is divergence distance between generative paths for each object
    - example:
      "what is the probable function linking these variables, 
      given that it is an adjacent transform of a square (related function type),
      and is a distant transform of a manifold (unrelated function type)?"

  II. Pattern analysis
    - what would the path between inputs/output be, given patterns of other paths?
    - "what is the function linking these variables, given common function patterns between variables of these types/topics/ranges/other metadata?"

  III. Organization analysis
    - optimal path/distribution/states
    - what would the optimal path be, given a certain intent, object identity, & host system?
    - "what is the function linking these variables that is most efficient/involves fewest variables/involves known constants?"

  IV. Causal analysis
    - given the position between these causal factors, which causal patterns are likeliest?
    - "given that a species occupies an interim position between evolution, efficiency, time, and environment, what is the likeliest causal shape linking a species with its environment?"
      - for more evolved organisms, this is a network causal shape, though species with less developed cognitive ability may have simple or uni-directional shapes with environment
    - "what is the function linking these variables, given these functions linking other adjacent generating variables/functions further up/down the causal shape"

  V. Type analysis
    - given a known type stack progression, what is the likeliest position or extension of that stack?
    - "given that these species evolved this way, what level of variance is the missing link between them likely to have?"
    - "what is the function linking these variables, given the type stacks of the function objects (dimensions, adjacent functions, identifiable shapes, etc)"

  VI. System analysis
    - what known/potential inputs/outputs available in the system could build the path?
    - "what is the function linking these variables, given the core functions used to build this system?"

  VII. Intent analysis
    - what intents/directions/priorities does this path align with or could be built from?
    - "what is the function linking these variables, given the variable intents a, b, c and the combination intent matrix ab, bc, ca, and the possible output intents of that matrix, and similarity to output intent of y"

  VIII. Variable analysis
    - variable accretion
    - at what point does a variable become relevant to another variable interaction layer?
    - how do constants accrete between rules, like caps to keep variance from flowing in to corners or creating boundary-invalidating openings in a system/component boundary?
    - what causes variables to cascade across layers, creating fractal variables?
    - delegation of variance into systems/types/functions/variables/constants

  IX. Functional analysis 
    - distortion (gap creation, divergence)
    - filling (gap closing, convergence)
    - fitting (path/structure derivation, path evolution in isolation & with other factors)
    - function types
      - change functions (applicable to all other function types)
      - limit/boundary functions
      - intent functions
    - function attributes
      - alignment: enforced/optional, core, required, emergent/output (built from core functions, with or without associated intent)
      - interaction: cooperative/conflicting
      - intent: generative, filtering, grouping, organization/delegation/distribution/matching/grouping/filtering, classification, differentiation/transformation
      - scope: abstract, contextual

    - are there multiple directions to approach function derivation from?

      - can patterns in metadata-generators (difference generators) be used to derive the function generators (core functions)?
      - does it loop around to the start, just like lowest math/structural interface (symmetry, equivalence) loops around to highest conceptual interface (balance, power, random)?
      - the shape of the interface nexus should be a circuit feeding itself 
        (fractal inputs to itself, where input interfaces are similar in that they can both generate & be generated by the current interface)
      - this means you can select an optimal interface to start from & a direction to navigate in on the standard order of interface traversal, and an optional interface-organizing metric (like difference) to order interfaces to traverse

  X. Interface analysis
    - determining position/trajectory on interface
    - selecting interface as best standard for comparison
    - identifying all interfaces with variance that cant be captured in other interfaces

    - interface metadata:
        - generatability/common derivable core functions with other interfaces
        - information loss
        - variance focus (what variance is exaggerated for comparison by this interface)
        - position of interface on default interface network (what distortions produce this filter/perspective from unfiltered origin)

    - interface operations:
        - intent / structure interface: assess intent interface by a standard of structure interface (which structures can simplify the intent interface)
        - function + pattern interface: merge networks of functions & patterns into one standard interface definition (input/output/logic + metadata of both objects)
        - function * pattern interface: 
          function patterns (what patterns are there in functions), pattern functions (what functions generate patterns)
          function pattern functions (what functions generate function patterns), pattern function patterns (what patterns are there in functions that generate patterns)
        - cause * type interface: 
          causal type interface (what types of cause are there), type cause interface (what causes types)
          causal type cause (what causes causal types), type cause type (what types of type causes are there)

  XI. Conceptual analysis
    - deriving unique concepts & their relationships
    - deriving output intents of concept combinations
    - fitting concept combinations to structures

  XII. Structural analysis
    - identify shape: chain/stack/network/mix/layer
    - identify adjacent shapes
    - identify compression functions of shape given target dimensions
    - identify transformation functions of shape given source/target shape
    - identify alignments/symmetries/gaps/conflicts
